So, uh, welcome to all this afternoon.
Thank you very much for coming.
And, uh, if I may just start, uh, by, um, sort
of perhaps passing a few comments from the committee.
Obviously this area here of ensuring that public entities
namely the Crown, but also others including, uh,
local government mm-hmm.
Um, committing
or completing their,
their commitments under treaty settlements is
a very important matter to us.
And, uh, this, uh, particular briefing is,
I think we've already premised you, is is primarily based on
the report produced by the Auditor General's office.
And it's got a number of recommendations there itself.
Um, also thank you very much for the document that you
provided, and we've also got it online there.
Uh, and I'll imagine you'll be talking to that to,
to somewhat, I also acknowledge that your entity itself
with Lins is, uh, a very busy one in, in with regards
to this particular space outside of, uh, well, from my read,
the, uh, outside of the Department of Conservation,
you have a huge number of commitments there.
And I must acknowledge you've done incredibly well
with the number you've already, uh, completed.
But nevertheless, it's really important to us to see
how we're going or where the challenges are, uh,
potentially, uh, what are we doing to make sure
that we keep up with the commitments
that the settlements themselves, uh, the right
of the wrongs of the past.
Mm-hmm. And we don't want to sit in a position
where we've still got wrongs going forward, so to speak.
So with that very, uh, beginning, um, I'll leave it to you
to do a bit of an introduction and, and talk to you
and we'll follow that with some, uh, uh,
questions, uh, for you.
And we've got about 45 minutes that we've allocated
for this, this time with today.
So away you go. Nevermind.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
I'm the Chief Executive of Land Information New Zealand.
Actually had my sixth anniversary of in the role yesterday.
Oh, congratulations. Also losing my voice.
Couldn't speak yesterday.
It's come back just briefly for this meeting.
Um, I thought given that, um,
because it's a bit unreliable,
I would just make some very brief comments
and then hand over to the experts, um,
and the team who will introduce themselves and,
and speak to some different areas, uh,
as introductory remarks.
Next go. Very pleased to take your questions.
Um, well, thank you very much for the opportunity to speak
to the committee today, uh,
about our work in treaty settlement commitment delivery, um,
and in particular about the improvements that we are making
and will continue to make, um, following
what we thought was a very helpful, um, ultimately
and quite, um, in incisive report on
the office, the Auditor General.
Um, what we'll cover today is, uh, our role in Lins.
We just give you a, an overview of that, um,
the recommendations in, in the report
and how, um, we are responding to those, what we are doing
and what we were already doing.
Uh, I wanna talk a little bit about our rfr quite of refusal
and memorials, which are very important part of,
of, uh, settlement commitments.
The reporting and tracking, um, the nitty gritty
of making sure that, uh,
that cement obligations are delivered on, uh, a bit
of delivery detail.
And then I thought we'll close with just letting you know
how the accountability
for delivery has translated into my performance
agreement as a ce.
Very good. Thank you. I'll hand over to Jan.
Um,
I'm the, uh, customer delivery.
So both the Crown property, which you'll hear about
and our Maori crown teams sit under my responsibility, um,
and I report to gay.
So, um, at Lins we have, as you, as you've identified,
an important role to play in supporting the Crown
to honor its commitments to Iwi and Maori.
Um, we take this responsibility, um, really seriously
and we are honored that we can be part
of righting the wrongs of the past, as you have identified.
Um, we have a particular focus on treaty
of Y settlement commitments involving land.
This includes management of properties held in the Land Bank
for future treat treaty settlements
and administration of deeds of settlement,
and registering rights
of first refusal memorials on land titles as part
of its review report.
In April this year, the audit, the Office
of the Auditor General,
provided recommendations to public service agencies in ways
that government can improve treaty settlement obligations
and how they delivered the review contained
one recommendation specific to us.
This was Land Information New Zealand works to ensure
that there is a system in place so that rights
of first refusal,
refusal memorials are correctly placed on land title.
The review also made a number of general recommendations
for public service agencies in the govern governing
entities, which are relevant to lends.
These include increasing both leadership capability
and delivery expectations on chief executives
who have settlement commitments and responsibilities.
And again, we'll talk about that more at the end
as a public sector organization or settlement commitments.
We review how we plan to meet
and monitor our settlement commitments, improving reporting
through our annual annual report on our role
and responsibilities in relation to settlements,
including providing accessible information on the status
of our commitments and any issues outstanding.
In March, 2025, we commenced a review of
how we work across lends
to deliver treaty settlement obligations.
This review identified both good practices
and areas for improvement.
We have now set clear expectations of roles
and responsibilities across the organization in relation
to settlement commitments.
We are implementing standardized processes
and tools with a focus on improving the registration
of rights of first refusal memorials,
and improving our delivery
and detailing reporting of settlement commitments.
To help us achieve this,
we are also strengthening our people's capability.
Our plan focuses on building our people's
understanding of New Zealand's history of TEI
or Ang Teo, Maori and Tikanga.
In Kawa, we have identified the level of capability required
for each role based on its level of engagement with Maori
and our ensuring more tailored training
and capability development
to actively build stronger relationships with Maori.
We have a dedicated Maori crown relationships function
that Deon will speak about soon, that engages with iwi
and works closely with our service delivery program.
So I'm gonna pass on to Sonya now
to talk more about our rights and first refusal.
Sonya Wiki. Um, I am the head of Crown Property
and ua, uh, the delivery arm, uh, of the treaty settlements.
Uh, and Dion will introduce herself
as in the Maori crown relations, um, component.
So, um, the recommendation from, um,
the report talked about the first writer of refusal
and we've provided information, um, in the pack, uh,
on page two and on page three.
And I just wanted to highlight a couple of things, uh,
which is actually in the pack, uh, that the, uh,
agreed treaty settlements, uh, grant
iwi the rights of first refusal.
Uh, and they're specifically on properties
or on areas that the Crown owned at the time, of course,
to ensure that we, uh,
safeguard iwi interests later if the Crown chooses
to get rid of that property.
Uh, we, uh, each settlement, uh, is quite unique.
Um, and I'm not gonna get into too much detail
unless that's part of your question.
Uh, and they talk about our list, um, RFR.
So we have list properties or area,
and so they, they can actually be quite complex.
Mm-hmm. Uh, but we need to work through those.
Uh, and we have, uh, to make sure all of those unique, uh,
things have been taken into account.
And if there is a title to be able
to register the first right of refusal on that title.
Uh, we have been, uh, doing some improvement work, um,
on the guidelines.
So we provide guidelines, uh, for other agencies.
Um, and what we are looking to do is make sure
that those guidelines for each specific treaty settlement
are available for other agencies to use as soon as
that treaty settlement is finalized, so that all
of the agencies understand, um, how
or how they should behaving or what they should be doing.
Uh, if however there is a title, uh,
then the lens people will put the memorial
in the title system.
And I think I might stop there. Okay. Um, and hand over to,
Um, I'm the head of Maori crown relations
and my role is the oversights of treaty settlements, um,
by bringing all of our together
and coordinating effectively amongst all of our teams
that do it, great amount of work.
Um, if you'll see on slide four,
we might just pause at slide three
'cause that's what, um, Sonia was talking about in the total
number of memorials here.
But on slide four, um, our commitments are visible
externally through the TE portal.
And as you would've seen in the slides
that we have just under 3000 of them,
those commitments vary in size.
They can be very simple, such as appointing a valuer for one
of the properties,
or can be very complex,
which includes large scale multi-year projects, demolishing
or remediating buildings earthworks.
Um, so we have quite a variety.
And with those commitments then they can get stuck in some
places as we work through the complexity of that.
But in 2023, if I may, um, just note, we did a big review
of TETA internally
and we were able to make sure that all
of the commitments were in the right place.
And at the beginning of this year, as part of a bigger piece
of work, we went through
and closed out a number of those,
which is why we've had quite a significant
movement from the beginning of the year
with our commitments to now.
Um, this is actually, even though it's only a couple
of weeks old, the commitments have
moved by another a hundred.
And that kind of speaks to how often we're in the portal,
making sure that we are updating daily.
Um, we coordinate with Sonya's team
so we get all of their information.
And what this does is it gives iwi
and other people assurance
or reassurance that we are completing
the MAHI as we are going.
And we've actually increased our standard of visibility
by ensuring that there are references within the notations.
So if we've transferred something,
there is a total reference in there,
so we don't have to do that.
But as part of our improvement process, we thought that
that would just be easier for Iwi
or PSGs to be able to identify those.
So as a part that was mentioned in the OAG, I mean at
that time and place, that was certainly something we
needed to improve on.
And I believe that we've done that really well.
One of the places that we,
that we've done particularly well would
be the delivery issues.
So we have leaders in both our teams that deal
with all of the escalations.
So we had a much, much larger number last year
of delivery issues and we've been able to get, um, work
through them all the ones that are there now though, uh,
with regard to our CFLs, which I'll talk to shortly.
So just to note that, um,
our commitment numbers are also included in our annual
report with an explanation about each of those sections.
So they're yet to be triggered though, if I could just point
to that, um, that number is there
because there are other agencies
or ESGs that need to do a mahi first,
and then our mahi happens after they've done their bit.
So that will always be around a hundred to 200
because it just requires somebody else to do something.
So those are generally out of our, so if I could go
to slide five, um, with regard
to the CFLs that I mentioned before.
So these are the CFLs that are overdue.
So the breach CFLs, if I, if I may say.
And, um, we've done quite well in moving stairs along.
We moved one along in July, so was returned back to,
um, I'm really pleased to be able to say,
and we did everything we could to have it transferred
before this, this morning.
But we also, I have no idea how much pressure we brought.
It just would've been nice, but thank you very much.
Committee. In any case, um, we are really pleased
to be able to advise that RAI
and Queen Charlotte, which is at the top
of the south island, all of
that documentation has been signed
and it is currently assigned for the last part,
which will transfer the forest back to, um, the even
that those relate to.
So that number I physically saw the, um,
we did the inches thick signed documentation that come back
because yesterday in our Hamilton office Mm.
And, and myself, Jan
and, um, gay has put a lot of pressure, a lot of pressure.
Um, but it's such a complex, um,
there's such complex dealings that if you think
of a normal dealing, which is quite a thin documentation,
this, this has a thick folder aligned to it.
So, um, our people are trying earnestly, uh,
our land registry people are trying
and earnestly to get that done for us.
That does mean that there are still some breach CFLs there,
sorry, over G CFLs.
Um, as you can see, some are in active litigation.
We won't be able to move those until, um,
that litigation concludes.
There is one there, Ru Ator that has gone back
to the MA land court for, um, for an order.
But the issue that we were dealing
with has now been resolved.
So we need that to come back out of the Maori land court
and then we can continue to transfer that for us across.
And then there are three others that we are working
with Iwi at the moment to resolve.
So those ones, though, those last three are issues
that require another agency to do something.
So we still need to wait for other parties
to be able to do their part.
Um, we don't like that they're overdue,
but we are trying as hard as we can to make that work.
And then obviously we have internal reporting
that we do both up to TU and the CEO.
So they're abreast of all of the mahi
that's going on in Maori crime relations.
And part of that is also reporting on the
effectiveness of our squads.
So we have squads that wrap around a, uh, treaty settlements
and then that squad monitors all of our, um,
dealings internally and externally, our comm with Iwi.
And so we report all of that through to Jan
and Gabe so that they are, um, aware of that.
And then from there we also report that in Teta
and then on which to the annual report.
So we've done quite a bit of mahi in that space to make sure
that we give as much visibility given the importance
of this mahi to the organization.
I might just talk to, if we go to the next slide.
So we did provide, um, committee just some information
around those Crown Forest licenses that weren't overdue.
Uh, and what we have learn,
and of course through part of the review is that we needed
to start earlier, uh,
on organizing those Crown Forest license, uh, titles
and documentation to be worked through with Iwi.
Uh, and this just demonstrates that, you know,
we've learnt and we've improved.
Mm-hmm. And so actually we have transferred a number of CFLs
to Iwi before, uh, the five year, um, time limit.
Mm-hmm. One the month after.
That's good.
So doing quite a lot of work upfront to make sure that,
um, you know, there's ongoing engagement with Iwi, uh,
and that we can get that, um, get that title transferred.
Okay. Thank you guys.
Great. Um, the last, uh, part that I thought I'd just, um,
suppose to, to demonstrate to the committee that, um,
the report, um, has been taken seriously
and that we have, um, I suppose up to the accountability
for delivery is that my performance expectations
as a CE now have, um, specific references to delivery
and treaty settlements, which is not the case
for all the work that the agency does.
So not all of our work is mentioned in there.
So this has been identified and prioritized.
Um, they include ensuring that all updates and,
and inputs into are consistent, timely, and accurate.
So the reporting, uh, ensuring
that Crown Forest license is not affected by disputes
or litigation or related party delays
are transferred to Iwi.
So that's staying on top of the current and future CFLs
and working, um, really hard to resolve the ways
that are stuck, continuing to support
and implement treaty settlement processes in a timely manner
to ensure organization
and system arrangements, support deliveries,
ensuring the organization stays resourced
and ready to implement future settlements.
And prioritize meeting treaty settlement commitments,
including reviewing how Lynn's plans to meet
and monitor commitments
and improving the information in our annual
report about progress.
So those are the four specific conventions in my
performance expectations.
Were those performance expectations, uh, was
that you proactively, um, seeking
that? Or was that delivered
By I do that with the commission,
but we suggested most of the detail of the wording
and they, they, but they asked
that it reflect the e expectations and findings of the OAG.
So it was picked up by the commission
and also picked up by us and together we after those.
Do you have specific budget lines, uh, that are associated
with this particular mahiki being on top
of this particular path?
No, I mean, it's included in the, in the funding
and appropriation and the Crown property, um,
and part of our work.
Um, and part of the Maori crown thing was also funded,
I think the weekly, but also we've allocated
what you might call collective overhead costs Right.
To the work to support this work, um,
that the treaty settlement commitments.
And has budget been a limiting factor in you being able
to deliver the good stuff you're
delivering today in the past?
Like what has led to this change outside of this
Prioritization?
Yeah. Yep. I think in focus
and probably, um, learning where to have the expertise, um,
uh, my team's responsible for the delivery
of the settlements, but having, uh,
Dion's team who's across making sure
that all the settlements from end, you know, start to end,
uh, in all of the various, uh, commitments through, uh,
actually being, um, you know, being realized.
So it's quite good. We've got our,
our own watchdog, uh, internally. Mm.
I think also we've really worked hard to align
amongst ourselves how we could work better.
Mm-hmm. Um, we were in very different systems,
so we've using common tools.
We have the ability for our leaders to work very closely.
Sonya and I work closely
and travel together at, at times just to
cool some, some things down.
But I think it's just been a real willingness to know that.
And I, if I can say the CFLs gave us a bit of a adult
that we had these breaches.
Mm-hmm. And I think we all wanted to do better than that.
So what we've done in the last 12
to 18 months has been quite a big shift.
I think the OAG came in just
as we were at the beginning of that change.
Mm-hmm. So we've been able
to realize those, um, improvements.
And this has just helped us focus on a couple of things.
But we were already well on our way, I think
by the time we saw the report,
we were quite shocked at how we'd already started.
I just quickly looked at the date
you started your review of March.
Mm-hmm. This report didn't come out,
so you'd obviously done something a little bit.
Right. Okay. Open up to questions from,
and you went of clarity for me. Great.
Yeah, just, um, that's, uh, thank you so much.
Um, that's, um, hugely encouraging, um,
to hear the detail of the work you've been doing.
And thank you very much for this document in advance.
Um, you've already touched on, um, on, on this,
but just running, given the fact that you've literally only
got five, um, with that experiencing delays,
are you able to run through quickly what those five,
I know you touched briefly on you, you said three
of them are to do with other departments.
So they're the ones that are in litigation are part
of the spinal award litigation.
So that's, and that's part of the high court and or Okay.
So we can't do anything with that.
And that's all five, that's the Waka two?
No, that's for, there's three Three outta
The five. Yeah. Okay. And
then the other three one's gone back
into the Maori land court.
So we can't proceed
until the judge provides his last commentary on the
easements that were put in place.
Yep. 'cause they were easements
for land alongside the crown forest.
Sure. And then the other two, there is a, um, oh,
I don't wanna throw them under the bus.
Um, but there's been some encroachments, um, oh, okay.
On the sides of the, um, crown forest.
So we need to legally sort that out. Right.
And, and fairness to the iwi, they would prefer
that we sorted that out.
Yeah. Okay. And so that's, that's that part.
And then the last one can't move until that one moves.
Gotcha. Right. So what I can reassure you though is
that we are in touch with our iwi all the time
and trying to find ways to resolve that.
Right. But
because it does involve other agencies, it does mean
that we need to coordinate with other agencies
to progress something that is well
outside our control, but we do it anyway.
So it just makes sense.
How do you work proactively with those other agencies?
'cause I would assume that Iwi
or the post settlement groups look at Lins,
it's your particular accountability and,
and doesn't matter whether they go into another spot,
how do you proactively try
and best position those other agencies that you rely on
with the delivery to be able
to do it in a timely, efficient manner?
So I think if I was talking about the forest,
we've just done a little bit of jiggle around
who is looking after that space.
Um, I'm quite bolshy, so I don't mind,
I don't mind ringing having a Hui with Iwi.
That wasn't a now No, no.
But I don't mind ringing iwi
and with our, with the relationship partners
that sit in my team is going, let's just go and visit
and find out what all the issues are.
I don't mind getting a growling.
I mean, I think it's, it's better to know than to assume.
And then in doing that, then we start
to work out a work program with Iwi around
how we can resolve it with the others.
We've met recently with Auckland Transport, where,
where there's, where there's something going on.
Um, and then we've resolved to work
with Auckland Transport someone in, uh, Sonya's team
that will deal, deal with some
of the ni n****y little parts.
And then I'm involved
and my relationship partner's involved as the oversight
to make sure we know it's moving.
Now, it's not to say that we could have done this sooner.
I think if we attack all of them at once, we,
it becomes a capacity issue.
But we have a very strong plan on what we can move,
what we can move now,
and that will what will take more time.
So the Waka two ones obviously are just gonna take time.
So you will continue to see these as breach CFLs
until all of that's done.
But at least we can talk to that,
we can explain why that is there.
Mm-hmm. And I know very intimately why
the other three are there as well.
Just before I ask for another
question, I just pass a comment.
I think it's important that it's seen
that you are proactive in a degree.
People can understand
and, you know, communications is really important.
They can understand that sometimes things don't go smoothly
as you, you anticipate,
but if you're seen to be procrastinating Yes.
Uh, then that will actually derive a, a different outcome
with regards to relationships and all that sort
Of, or if we, or if we go quiet.
Yes. Even if we are, even if we are beavering away
and inside our own organization, if we don't communicate it,
um, people can lightly assume that not much is happening.
I agree. Even if that's not case
Question. The other part
of that, just
before you move on, sorry, is also, um, within the teams,
them working closely together
and actually helping Iwi
to understand their part of it as well.
Right. Rather than sitting back and saying that's yours.
We've, we really actively on, on assisting Iwi to,
to actually do the things they, they need to do as well.
Adrian. Um, some claimant groups are quite surprised
that it can take up to five years to transfer.
Um, see if they should be shorter.
Well, I see you managed to, um,
cut it, actually cut it down.
Yeah. Which is great.
But, um, like a lot of things,
timeframes end up being targets rather than actual,
And they are, um, The timeframe is set within the
settlement legislation, so it does allow for that period.
And I think what we have learnt is if we don't start
Quick enough, we haven't been, we don't good at, um,
reaching that target.
Um, should it be less,
I think it depends.
It depends on the complexity.
I think with, um, if we think about the
forest, it was one iwi
and it was those forests were going to one iwi.
Yeah. When there are multiple iwi, that's not an excuse,
but rather that it gets a little bit more complex.
Yeah. But despite that,
if on average doing it in 18 months, wouldn't it be better
to just make it 18 months with the knowledge
that some will go overdue anyway?
I think that the numbers would demonstrate
that when we start earlier, we can do it quicker.
And I think that is the learning from the past
that it was a target rather than a, than a, you know, the,
the real time it took.
Um, that said, there is a, a ex,
there's been an extremely high amount of priority Yes.
Given to achieve these numbers.
So that would have to be maintained.
And to your question about the funding,
we have made decisions to prioritize this work, which means
that some work that we want us to do with them
that is not about treaty settlements,
we haven't prioritized yet.
Well, that's good for us to hear
because, um, I think that's something that
committee, we need to note that it's dependent on,
um, resourcing to actually do, you know,
carry out these functions which are
legally binding. Yes. Yeah,
Exactly.
So an example of that might be we get a number of requests
for geospatial data or based data that Lens provides.
Now Iwi would love us to help them do that,
but to do that fully, we would have to stop that.
Mm-hmm. So there, we don't like to do that.
So where we can fit it in, we do,
but it does mean if this is the priority
that is in all of our mm-hmm.
You know, accountabilities
and legally we're required to do, then we start with
that first and then we move across to
what we can do after that.
Can I just ask a supplementary
to this before we come to your room?
Mm-hmm. Your, um, changing of priorities,
I'll call it over time, but I think there's been a shift
here with the whole organization.
I wanna understand if I can,
what made you lead to that change?
Because we have a challenge ourselves in talking
to other ces of other organizations about what,
what's gonna motivate them to change their priorities?
What lead you to change yours?
Well, for, for Lens, if we are really, uh,
direct about it, our dealings
with land is our core business.
And this is really close to our core business.
It's not a di it's actually we diverted from,
in a way, our core business in relation to land
by not prioritizing this work
or maybe for other agencies, it's additional rather than
what they might have described as core.
So, so for Lynn's, for example, land bank properties, we've,
we've held onto land bank properties prior to settlements,
and that is part of our core business to hold that land.
Then, then the settlements are achieved,
the land is then transferred.
So we actually, in a way, we just, we're continuing
what is part of our core work.
There's no point us holding onto land
that we shouldn't be holding onto.
Right. And so then we transfer it.
The CFLs are a little different,
but, so I think there's been two things.
The shock of the breach, the shock
of those CFL breaches mm-hmm.
Was significant. Yeah.
Um, the assertiveness with which we were,
which we were held to account by iwi for those breaches,
you were receiving complaints?
Oh yeah. We, we did, when, when we sent the, the,
the key one, which was Riverhead Mm.
And we talked to Iwi about, we can't get this done in time,
would you agree to an extension?
We heard from them in no uncertain terms,
the impact that that would have on us.
Okay. And so that was really clear
that their expectation was
that the contract would be honored
and that we weren't going to honor it.
And it was, it was not acceptable to them.
So really that was a, that was probably one
of the key change.
And what does Yeah. Okay.
Remark. Um, funnily enough, it kind of, um,
intertwines No, no, no, it's okay.
Um, uh, gay. Yes. Uh, I'm Chief Executive Kda.
You mentioned that, um, in your opening cordo you said that,
um, performance delivery, your performance delivery, um,
it, it needs to include treaty, um, settlement obligations.
And I just want to ask, at
what point within the last six years
did that come into play?
It's formally in my performance expectations this year
for the first time it's been called out as a specific thing.
Previously it would've been incorporated into deliver all
the operational obligations of your department.
So it wouldn't have been identified as a specific area
of work or a project in the same way.
Um, but I think it that, you know,
this year there's probably four key things that I need
to deliver that are priorities.
And this is one of the ones that's been called out as well
as ensuring that my agency has the capability
to work effectively with, with iwi across the board,
not just in terms of settlements.
So that's probably, it is probably got more pointy in the
last year, but I wouldn't say it's been
absent in previous years.
It just hasn't been as, um, specifically identified. Mm-hmm.
Thank you, Scott.
Um, thank you for talking about the data side
and that it's not a particular priority at the moment,
but I imagine that you're getting queries from, um,
iwi Mariah about, particularly with sea level rise and,
and climate impacts at risk, Mariah at risk.
Mm-hmm. Um, what, how,
because this seems like quite a priority as well.
How are we gonna manage these competing priorities?
And, and that's one question.
And is the relationship with the earth sciences
previously GNSS going to enable
that provision of, of, um,
data points essentially to help adaptation
and manage the risks for really important,
really important sites?
How, I mean, it's a big question,
but mm-hmm. Um, that's a good
Question. We can break it up though.
Let's talk about
what is publicly available that is usable,
because you talk about that Jan.
And then we might talk about some specific engagement
that we've had with Iwi around
geospatial information. Mm-hmm.
So, um, we were successful two years ago in the budget to,
um, commence a project, um, to do coastal mapping.
So this is bringing together the, our Sea data along
with, um, land data.
There's a piece in the middle that doesn't get matched
through those two, um, processes.
And, um, so at the moment,
and this will then enable organizations like Earth Science
to do the modeling, what's the impact of flood?
Um, what's the impact of, um, tsunami, how far up the,
you know, depending on the sea floor
and what it looks like, if there's a shelf or,
or the, um, coast, then the tsunami won't hit it, you know,
come over so much, et cetera.
So that project, um, is in its first year,
we've just done the data gathering
and that'll be available to everybody to enable, um,
as you say, for councils for earth sciences to do
that modeling and understand the impact of both, um,
sea level rise, but also the land moves too.
And groundwater. Yeah. Yeah.
So, um, because it's can be a double whammy.
If the sea's coming up and the land's going down,
you're actually gonna inundate a lot faster.
So, um, so that project's happening at the moment.
We did, um, flying season, so using, using, um,
lidar at the metric lidar and land lidar.
And, um, that project did had a flying season last summer.
'cause obviously you can only fly in the summer.
And, um, and we're just in the throes of processing
that data now, and we're doing, uh, about 40%
of the coastline, um, using, um, parts
of the coast that either have assets or, um, built up areas.
Um, and that's the first stage of the project.
So that'll help provide the data
and then be able to do the analysis to understand the
Impacts. And this is
on top of the data that's already been available
through the LIDAR program, which has been running for,
what, six years or so?
Yeah. Mm-hmm. Um, which covers a lot of inland waterways.
Yeah. So that's, that,
that information is currently publicly available,
the point venture with council. So
Just do a quick follow.
So thank you. That's great to hear.
And that, so that LIDAR data,
when you say make it available.
Yep. Um, I'm aware,
previously I did some work on looking at climate adaptation
and we had access to LIDAR data.
Mm-hmm. But it took a specialist to be able to Yeah.
Show to show what that actually looked like. Mm-hmm.
And so what you are, what you are preparing is,
is essentially that data,
but not, not the, not the analysis.
Not the analysis. No, not So you're making it available.
Yeah. But it requires
Analysis. Yeah.
Analysis of request. So If I may just give the example,
um, with Iwis that we worked very closely with one
of the I Bay plenty.
Mm-hmm. So when they were doing the flyover
on the 3D coastal mapping, that Iwi was very much involved.
And one of the things we did is
that we released their information first.
Um, and then we listened to what it was they wanted to do.
Now we've had similar requests.
And so I worked very closely
with the head of land information.
It does all of that. And we've been, my, my team
and his team have been working really closely with Iwi.
Now I know it is a secondary priority.
Um, the reality is this is what Iwi wants,
so you are absolutely right.
Mm-hmm. So we do actually fit it in 'cause we have laws
and some of our settlement work,
and we ha I have two people that work, um, a lot with Iwi
around how can we get them access to data.
There are two things that we do within MCR.
One is we have an iwi pannu,
and in that iwi pani, we let Iwi
and Maori know where all of our d all the touch points are.
One of those important touch points is the ua, um,
web webinars that we hold online.
Yeah. And they actually help iwi to navigate our system
and navigate our data to be able to take
that GIS expertise into the iwi space.
GIS is Yeah. Geo spatial information.
So if they have a GIS person,
then we help them connect that.
And then those, um, webinars are,
they're brilliant actually.
Mm-hmm. And one of our team members, Mariah, is about to go
and do one within MCR land online, um,
inter intersect, which, which is based off the feedback.
C oh, don't
Apologize. Sorry,
I'm just,
So we've embedded ourselves into the space.
Yeah. But it is dependent on being able to have the skills
to be able to do the analysis.
And we recognize, recognize
that our role is very much about providing the data,
the underlying data, sort of ging on the cake
that we've been asked to help use it.
What, just a very, very quick, as
Long as it's attached to what we're doing, he,
we can talk, it's not related to this. No,
No, no. Okay. No,
no. I'll let it, this is
Not a conversation about all sorts of other things.
This particular No, it's time.
Um, just, we are getting close to the end.
I just wanna talk about mm-hmm.
And, um, you use, it's, it's a new tool.
It's, it's a, a new, uh, reporting mechanism
and it's still evolving itself.
Yeah. So any feedback with regards to that?
Uh, how's it going? Um,
Yeah, we've, because we've been utilizing it
for two years, we've become quite okay with the system.
So we are in there every day, every week.
Um, and I think we're accustomed to it.
Is, is it, is it a bit clunky? Yes.
There are so many procedural steps that,
and I think the hardest part, I was just,
we were just talking outside about it, is that if you,
if a iwi has 20 properties
and you transfer five, none of that mahi can be closed down
until the remaining 15 are done.
So it is really hard to show progress sometimes,
or to move, um, commitment into the complete space.
'cause there's, you, you have
to do everything for all of it.
So all or nothing. Yeah. So it's all or nothing.
And I think the frustrating thing is we find that difficult
'cause it's so much good mahe.
Yeah, yeah. You know, but we just can't, we can't show it.
Yeah. It's not visible. It's not visible.
So we have to show that in a different way. Yeah.
Our reporting will reflect that,
but it also means that we've got a lot more notations in
Teta to explain,
or if the iwi decide they don't want 10 of those properties,
that doesn't fall outta Teta, that still sits there.
So then we have to go in
and make a notation on each of those commitments.
So it, it takes a lot more work,
but we are committed to doing it.
And we've gotten quite, quite well at doing it,
as you can see from the numbers as we,
we know our data very well. And
I think that what we heard, uh, was that they are,
it's a dynamic situation.
They're trying to improve on it. Yes.
And I'm sure they'll appreciate that kind of feedback.
And we, and we have invested quite a lot of time too.
Yeah. We did a bit of an intensive to get the data accurate
to really invest in the, you know, as the official record.
Yes. Um, and no system is perfect,
but it's the system we have.
So we need to make it work as well as we can. Okay.
Well done. I'll just ask if there are any
last questions before I make a closing.
Any notes. If not, doesn't appear to be, I just wanna say,
um, it's, it's very, very encouraging.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. To know, uh,
what the mahi has been over the last six
to four months in this space here.
We treat this as incredibly important
as the Maori Affairs Committee mm-hmm.
Get outcomes for Maori and, and all that.
And this is right into this space here.
Um, gay, the fact that you proactively, uh, from
what I'm hearing here, uh, with, uh,
forming the KPIs within your contract is music to my ears.
I'm sure you've see what else's ears,
because if there is actually accountability at the, uh,
at the highest, uh, position in the organization,
it doesn't guarantee it, but it, it spells well
for action coming through the organization.
It is one of our challenges.
That's one of the recommendations Yes.
That are in this report. And it's not the case everywhere.
And I also thank you Gay for actually appearing today
as the CE because, uh, I don't think we're gonna see that
with other organizations, which says to me the, uh,
you know, what priority they're actually placing on this
particular say thank you.
Oh, yeah. Uh, very much, uh, for that. Um, yeah.
So I mean, just generally it's, it's, I'm hearing good news.
My concern or my worry is to make sure
that this heightened work mahi that you're doing
as an organization that's enduring and sustainable.
Yes. Mm-hmm. It's not just a reaction for the fact
that there's been, oh boy, we've got some problems here.
It's how do you make this business as usual, uh, going
through there to be the best you can
and making sure you're doing the very, very important thing,
which is communication back with the key stakeholder.
Yes. Instead of areas that it's
what I would encourage and thank you.
It sounds like we, you're achieving that.
So well done, uh, for that.
So, uh, gay, Jan, Sonya,
and di, thank you very much for coming in front of us today.
We really appreciate it. And, uh, who knows?
We, we, we might, this is all as important as that,
you know, we'll be looking for this in, in,
in the annual reports, but we may actually, potentially,
I don't know, to keep updating you Exactly.
See how we go. Yeah. We want, you know, we want
to be a successful organization in all respects.
So it's very satisfying for Good job. Well done.
Thank you.